# JMAP

<p style="margin-left:-40px;"><iframe width="780" height="469" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/8qCSK-aGSBA?version=3&amp;rel=0&amp;fs=1&amp;showsearch=0&amp;showinfo=1&amp;iv_load_policy=1&amp;wmode=transparent" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="true"></iframe></p>

## What is JMAP?

JMAP is intended to be a new standard for email clients to connect to mail stores. It therefore intends to primarily replace IMAP + SMTP submission. It is also designed to be more generic such that it can be extended with contacts, calendars in the future (replacing CardDAV/CalDAV). It does not replace MTA-to-MTA SMTP transmission.

## Why is this needed?

It's too hard to write a good MUA with current standards, which has led to a stagnation in good email clients and a proliferation of proprietary protocols.

In addition, IMAP is really not suited to a constrained network environment, as often found on mobile networks even in developed countries. The chatty nature of the IMAP protocol is ill-suited to high latency connections. Things like a folder rename on the server can mean that all the downloaded and cached email for that folder is invalidated (because you can't tell for sure over the protocol that they're the exact same messages), wasting huge amounts of bandwidth. Stateful connections make it harder to deal with intermittent network outages.

We're attempting to standardise a new protocol because lots of people are writing proprietary alternatives to deal with the same deficiencies with the current standards. Some of these deficiencies could be fixed by adding things to IMAP (for example persistent IDs on folders and messages for better caching when another client copies, moves or renames), but others are structural like the need to calculate a MSGNO <=> UID mapping even if the client doesn't want it, or the need to find endpoints and authenticate separately to multiple different protocols to do related tasks.

Because it's so hard to write a good email client that works with any IMAP provider, these days many new clients are just for Gmail (with possibly support for a few other big mailbox providers). It's easy to see why: IMAP is either the woefully inadequate original RFC3501, or it's a messy set of incomplete implementations of some of the extensions. Even CONDSTORE (without QRESYNC) is pushing it; you can't rely on it to be there in most cases.

As a result of this, proprietary protocols have been popping up as alternatives to IMAP. Here are a few examples, the latter two being from whole companies that formed just to try to help people not have to deal with IMAP:

* [Gmail](https://developers.google.com/gmail/api/v1/reference/)
* [Outlook](https://msdn.microsoft.com/office/office365/APi/mail-rest-operations)
* [Nylas](https://nylas.com/cloud/docs)
* [Context.io](https://context.io/docs/lite)

In addition, we're seeing most new mobile email clients proxy everything via their own server rather than talking directly to the user's mail store, for much the same reasons. Examples include Mailbox (now defunct), Alto, Outlook and Newton. This is bad for security and privacy, and also bad for the client authors as they have to run server infrastructure in addition to just building their clients.

Despite not only being proprietary but patented (and expensive!), ActiveSync has seen a big increase in adoption, and not just with Microsoft servers, due to its better support for mobile environments and ease of setup (one login for mail receive/send, contacts and calendars).

## Why is JMAP better than IMAP?

JMAP is not a conversion of IMAP to JSON; it is a new protocol. It was designed to be make much more efficient use of network resources, be easier for developers to work with and hopefully make the best protocol for email an open standard once more. It's based on years of experience and real-world experimentation at FastMail, and talking to other major MUA/MTA developers to make sure we understand the common needs of the industry.

Some important attributes that help achieve these goals:

* The protocol is stateless. It doesn't need a persistent connection, which is better for mobile use which may have intermittent network access and wants to conserve battery life by turning the radio off whenever possible.

* Ids are immutable and not intended to be user visible. So folder naming becomes less messy - more like NFS or filesystems with inodes rather than a name-based hierarchy, and renaming is easy to detect and cheap to sync.

* It has a flexible set of commands, which can be batched in arbitrary ways.  You can batch or pipeline single JMAP operations over a stream protocol easily enough if you wanted to, but we're mostly envisaging it being used for stateless batch operations to make disconnection less painful.

  With IMAP you can set two messages to both have the same flag `(. STORE 1,2 +FLAGS (aflag))` but you can't store two different flags to two different messages in the same action. JMAP allows multiple create, update and destroy actions on different messages in a single setMessages command. Pipelining also has the problem that if the connection drops at just the wrong moment you can wind up applying the first change but not the second.

  You can use backreferences to other objects created in the same batch - allowing you to, for example, create a folder tree by referencing previous parents created in the same request.

* Clients can efficiently fetch updates from their current state a-la QRESYNC. This can be implemented effectively using the MODSEQ data already in modern IMAP servers, or by using a transaction log data structure. The server can always indicate to the client if it cannot calculate updates from a particular client state (e.g. because it is too old).

* Flood control. The client can always restrict how much data the server should send. For example, a command might return a "tooManyUpdates" error if it exceeds the client's limit, rather than returning a million "* 1 EXPUNGED" lines as can happen in IMAP. Sometimes it's just more efficient to throw away cached data and refetch, especially if you're a mobile/webmail interface with only a partial cache of the server's data.

* It doesn't require a custom parser. I've got a longer explanation to the HTTPS/JSON question lower down, but having an encoding format that is well understood and has widespread support among all programming languages makes it far easier for developers to get started, especially if they don't want to build a whole MUA but just integrate something with email.

* The data model is backwards compatible with both IMAP folders and gmail-style labels. Servers that implement JMAP are likely to want to support IMAP as well for the foreseeable future, so it's important to be able to have data structures that support both. Messages are similarly immutable other than flags/mailboxes.

* Email can be sent using the same protocol, reducing confusing failure modes for users (again I talk more about this below). We also have pretty-much complete specs for calendaring and contacts via JMAP, but we're not pushing for them to be standard yet because the object format is still undergoing a lot of work in the CalConnect group. We think a single consistent protocol for all of these has a lot of advantages though, and we hope to get there in the future.

## Why use HTTPS/JSON?

The short answer is it's good enough, widely understood and it's by far the easiest thing for developers to adopt. There's support in basically all OSes and programming languages. It's easy to read and debug.

HTTP doesn't tend to run into firewall issues, and is so commonly used it has integrations which can help with optimisation (for example, iOS has built-in support for optimising radio usage by batching HTTP calls from different apps where possible, which their mail team have told us they would like to be able to use). This isn't an innate advantage of HTTP, but rather an advantage of its ubiquity.

With GZIP, JSON data is reasonably compact and fast enough to serialise/parse. However, the encoding/transport part of JMAP is not core to its operation, so future specifications could easily add alternatives (e.g. [WebSocket](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6455) instead of HTTPS, [CBOR](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7049) instead of JSON). For the initial version though, HTTPS+JSON makes the most sense.

## Binary data

Binary data is not transported in the JSON (and indeed, as has been pointed out, can't be without base64 encoding or similar, which is inefficient). Instead, attachments are referenced by a blobId, and uploaded/downloaded separately via HTTPS. Clients can reference the blobId elsewhere to, for example, attach the same file to a new message without having to download and reupload it again, a big win on slower internet connections.

This also means that regularly saving drafts (a common client behaviour) does not mean sending the same full multi-megabyte attachments over the network every 60s or so.

As it's out-of-band with the API calls, uploading/downloading files can easily be parallelised and doesn't block other API operations.

## Representation of email

JMAP defines a JSON structure that represents in a consistent and structured way all the information that the vast majority of clients need from an RFC5322 message. The server deals with the complexities of MIME, encoding issues, parsing headers etc. The intention is that the server will still operate with RFC5322 messages for storage and certainly transmission; the JSON representation is not intended to replace RFC5322, just relieve client authors from having to deal with it.

Clients that want to or need to (for example those doing PGP in the client) can still fetch the RFC5322 if needed. The message is represented by a blobId, and the raw bytes can be fetched using the same binary download mechanism as mentioned above.

## Message submission

Message submission is via means of an "outbox" folder. Messages are moved there to send. This was chosen over a separate "send" command for a few reasons. Firstly it's most consist with the rest of the API, making it easier for clients to implement offline support (synchronisation is the same as other changes you might make to messages). Secondly, clients/servers can support delayed send (particularly useful for "undo send"), by simply setting the date on the message in the future and only sending from the outbox when this date is reached. Until then the message is just sitting in the outbox like any other mailbox, allowing client to list and revoke without needing custom API commands.

Error handling is flexible enough to return a full range of errors when you try to move a message to this folder, just as you would to a separate "send" method.

Clients can use the same JSON structure for sending messages as they get from the server for received messages, allowing the server to deal with MIME encoding. This allows clients to be much simpler and easier to write. (They can also upload a raw RFC5322 message if they want instead of course.)

Having the same protocol for message sync and submission is a huge win for usability; we see a lot of support tickets where users can receive but not send, or vice versa, because one of these is misconfigured. This is always very confusing for regular users.

## Push mechanism

Immediate updates is an important feature to many users. IMAP IDLE has two big problems: firstly it only notifies of changes in one folder, so doesn't inform you of all changes unless you open a connection for every folder, and secondly it requires a persistent network connection which is bad for mobile (and not even allowed on iOS).

JMAP defines two push mechanisms to support the two common use cases. In both cases the data transferred is simply an edge trigger: a new state string letting the client know something has changed within a particular datatype. The client then fetches the new data using the standard synchronisation methods.

For desktop clients and webmail, there's an [event source interface](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/comms.html#the-eventsource-interface). This requires a persistent HTTP connection.

For mobile, and web integrations, you can set a callback handler. This makes the mail store server do a callback to a server defined by the client when something changes; the client's server can then send out-of-band push events using the native push mechanism of the mobile client. JMAP itself doesn't require any particular mobile push technology.

## End-to-end encryption

A lot of the optimisations for efficient client-server sync require the server to be able to read the message. If everything were encrypted, the server would basically be a dumb blob store, unless you have some clever partial metadata search capability. This is particularly bad for mobile, where you only want to sync partial information. Users expect to be able to search their whole archive, so either you need all the data in the client, or the server needs to have access to the data.

JMAP is therefore not making any new measures to address end-to-end encryption. The best advice is probably to run your own "JMAP SERVER" on trusted hardware; otherwise you need to sync the entire multi-gigabyte mail spool to all your devices. JMAP is also simple enough that you could run the server on multiple machines with an underlying replication protocol over encrypted links and have that do your smarts.

## Why is it not REST based?

JMAP is actually more REST-like than most "RESTful" APIs. It is stateless, highly cacheable, supports transparent intermediaries and provides a uniform interface for manipulating different resources. However, it doesn't use HTTP verbs to implement this.

When you have a high latency connection (such as on a mobile phone, or even wired connections from the other side of the world), the extra round trips required for an HTTP REST-based protocol can make a huge impact on  performance. This is especially an issue when you have an order-dependency in your API calls and you need to make sure one has finished before the other can be run (for example when you mutate the state of a message then want to fetch the changes to a mailbox containing the message). In the JMAP protocol, this can be done in a single round trip. An HTTP REST-based version would require two full round trips for the same operation.

The JMAP protocol is transport agnostic and can be easily transported over a WebSocket, for example, as well as HTTP.

## Why do labels apply to messages not threads?

Mutable state has to be stored per-message, for example the `isUnread` status must apply on a per message basis, and it's very useful to be able to flag a particular useful message rather than just the whole thread. To be able to delete a particular message to the Trash out of a thread, you need to be able to change the mailbox of that message. Sent messages should belong to the sent mailbox, but not messages you receive.

Meanwhile, it is simple to aggregate the information of the messages in the thread. So, for example, if any message in the thread is unread, then the thread can be considered unread. There is no need to store mutable state as a property of a thread therefore, and the less mutable state, the easier it is to manage. Finally, all known existing IMAP implementations, plus Gmail, store this state per-message, not per-thread, so it makes it easier for implementors to migrate to JMAP.

## Why are there flags (e.g. isUnread) separate to mailboxes?

In IMAP, you can only have one mailbox but you can have multiple flags on a single message. In other systems (where you have labels), these are really the same thing and you can have a single message in multiple mailboxes. JMAP aims to support both, so it has to be able to specify whether a mailbox can be used in combination with other mailboxes on a message, or must be the only one with the message (but does allow different flags). The clearest way of specifying what is allowed by the server is to keep the mailboxes separate to flags in JMAP as well.

## Why isUnread instead of isRead?

Although this may seem inconsistent at first, it actually makes more sense. The "special" status is when a message is unread (this is what clients are interested in), so like isDraft, isFlagged and isAnswered, we make the special status equal to `true`. It is also consistent with the need for unread counts in mailbox objects, not read counts, and makes the definition of sorting a message list the same for isFlagged and isUnread when conversations are collapsed.

## I want to get involved with JMAP. What do I need to know?

First of all, you should join the [JMAP mailing list](https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/jmap). Feedback is welcome: send your thoughts or comments on anything that is imprecise, incomplete, or could simply be done better in another way. Or if you're working on something JMAP related, this list is a good place to let other people know and to raise any issues you come across.

The specification itself is [hosted on GitHub](https://github.com/jmapio/jmap). If you've found a typo or other minor change, feel free to just submit a pull request. Otherwise, discussion on the mailing list first is preferred.

## I want to implement it. What do I need to know?

That's great! There are lots of resources on this website to help you. Counter-intuitive though it may seem, I recommend starting with the [guide for client authors](client.html) to get a good feel for how the JMAP spec works. After that though, [the spec](spec.html) is your bible and the [advice for implementors](server.html) is your friend.

If you're implementing the spec and suddenly find there's an externally visible behaviour that's not specified, please email the [mailing list](https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/jmap) so we can update the spec to nail down this corner.

## I want to use it to build a client. What do I need to know?

Have a read through the [client guide](client.html) to get an idea of how it works. Then you'll want to find a JMAP server to test against.
