**Warning: this guide is outdated, it is based on an older draft of the JMAP specification**

# Advice for JMAP implementors

This document describes a recommended set of database tables and algorithms for efficiently implementing JMAP. It is intended to serve as suggestions only; there may well be better ways to do it. The spec is the authoritative guide on what constitutes a conformant JMAP implementation.

## Assigning Email Ids

A good way of assigning an Email id is to use a secure hash function on the RFC5322 message. If you want to support having identical messages with different ids, you'll then need to keep hashing the result if there are collisions until you find an unused id. In general, I recommend not doing this.

## Modification sequences

A modification sequence, or **modseq**, is a 64-bit unsigned monotonically incrementing counter. Each user has their own modseq counter (in IMAP it's originally per-mailbox, but per user is backwards compatible with this). Every time a change occurs to data within the user, the modseq is incremented by one and the new value is associated with the changes. This is used in a number of data structures and algorithms below to efficiently calculate changes.

## Data structures

As ever in programming, get your data structures right and the server will practically write itself.

### 1. Emails

The mutable state and fields that need to be fetched for message list display for a message. The raw message itself is presumed to be stored in a separate (probably much slower) blob store, accessible again by the message id (or if ids are assigned by the blob store, add this as an extra property to the table).

- **id**: `String` (The Email id)

Properties below have the values as specified in the **Email** object in the JMAP Mail spec.

- **blobId**: `String` (if different to Email id)
- **threadId**: `String`
- **mailboxIds**: `String[Boolean]` (Mutable)
- **keywords**: `String[Boolean]` (Mutable)
- **from**: `Emailer[]|null`
- **to**:  `Emailer[]|null`
- **subject**: `String`
- **date**: `Date`
- **size**: `Number`
- **preview**: `String`
- **attachments**: `Attachment[]|null`

Data sync properties:

- **createdModSeq**: `Number`
  The modseq when the Email was created.
- **updatedModSeq**: `Number`
  The modseq when the Email was last modified.
- **deleted**: `Date|null`
  The timestamp when the Email was deleted.

### 2. Threads

- **id**: `String` (The thread id; UUID suggested)

- **emails**: `ThreadEmail[]`
  The list of Emails belonging to the thread, sorted as required in the spec, with drafts immediately after the Email they are in reply to, then by date order.

    A **ThreadEmail** has the following properties:

    - **id**: `String`
      The Email id
    - **mailboxIds**: `String[]`
    - **isUnread**: `Boolean`
    - **isFlagged**: `Boolean`

Data sync properties:

- **createdModSeq**: `Number`
  The modseq when the thread was created.
- **updatedModSeq**: `Number`
  The modseq when the thread was last modified.
- **deleted**: `Date|null`
  The timestamp when the thread was deleted.

### 3. Mailboxes

- **id**: `String`  (The mailbox id; UUID suggested)

- **name**: `String`
- **parentId**: `String|null`
- **role**: `String|null`
- **sortOrder**: `Number`
- **mayReadItems**: `Boolean`
- **mayAddItems**: `Boolean`
- **mayRemoveItems**: `Boolean`
- **mayCreateChild**: `Boolean`
- **mayRename**: `Boolean`
- **mayDelete**: `Boolean`
- **totalEmails**: `Number`
- **unreadEmails**: `Number`
- **totalThreads**: `Number`
- **unreadThreads**: `Number`

Data sync properties:

- **createdModSeq**: `Number`
  The modseq when the mailbox was created.
- **updatedModSeq**: `Number`
  The modseq when the mailbox was last modified.
- **updatedNotCountsModSeq**: `Number`
  The modseq when any property other than the email/thread counts was last modified.
- **deleted**: `Date|null`
  The timestamp when the mailbox was deleted.

- **highestUID**: `Number`
  The highest uid so far assigned to an Email in the MailboxEmailList.
- **emailHighestModSeq**: `Number`
  The highest mod seq of any Email in the mailbox.
- **emailListLowModSeq**: `Number`
  The lowest modseq we can calculate MailboxEmailList updates from.

### 4. MailboxEmailList

This data structure allows for IMAP support, and for very fast response to the most common message list fetch/updates queries (where the filter is a single mailbox, and sort is date descending).

- **id**: `mailboxId . (Max_Int64 - EmailDate) . uid`
  The id is a concatenation of the mailbox id, then the message date inverted so date descending is the forward order, then the UID assigned.

- **messageId**: `String`
  The message id.
- **threadId**: `String`
  The thread id of the message.
- **updatedModSeq**: `String`
  The current `updatedModSeq` of the message.
- **created**: `Date`
  Date this message was added to the mailbox.
- **deleted**: `Date|null`
  Date this message was removed from the mailbox.

Note, the updatedModSeq is set at the same time as the deleted field when the message is removed from the mailbox, but not then updated even if the message is changed again. (If the message is added back to the mailbox it will be assigned a new uid, so a new record will be created).

### 5. EmailChangeLog

A log of modseqs when messages are created/updated/destroyed, for faster responses to *Email/changes*.

- **id**: The modseq of the change

- **created**: `String[]`
  The list of email ids for messages that were created.
- **updated**: `String[]`
  The list of email ids for messages that were updated.
- **destroyed**: `String[]`
  The list of email ids for messages that were destroyed.

### 6. ThreadChangeLog

A log of modseqs when threads are created/updated/destroyed, for faster responses to *Thread/changes*.

- **id**: The modseq of the change

- **created**: `String[]`
  The list of thread ids for threads that were created.
- **updated**: `String[]`
  The list of thread ids for threads that were updated.
- **destroyed**: `String[]`
  The list of thread ids for threads that were destroyed.

### 7. Refs to Thread

This is solely used to look up the conversation to assign to a message on creation/import/delivery. Maps the RFC5322 message ids found in the `Message-ID`, `In-Reply-To` and `References` headers of each message received to the thread id assigned to that message.

- **id**: `hash(rfc822id) . hash(subject)`
  The id is a concatenation of a secure hash of the RFC5322 message id and a
  secure hash of the subject of the message after stripping:

  * Anything in square brackets
  * All words followed by a colon from the beginning of the message
  * All white space

- **threadId**: `String`
  The thread id assigned to this message.
- **lastSeen**: `Date`
  The date of the last time this id was seen in a new message. This is used to
  clean up older entries after a while.

If two messages share a common RFC5322 message id in the set of such ids within each message, and the messages have the same `Subject` header hash, then they should belong in the same thread. Otherwise they should belong in different threads.

### 8. HighLowModSeqCache

These are singleton values that need to be stored. If using a DB table, would be id/number values.

- **highModSeq**: `Number`
  The highest mod seq that has been assigned, across all types.
- **highModSeqEmail**: `Number`
  The highest mod seq assigned to a message.
- **highModSeqThread**: `Number`
  The highest mod seq assigned to a thread.
- **highModSeqMailbox**: `Number`
  The highest mod seq assigned to a mailbox.
- **lowModSeqEmail**: `Number`
  The lowest mod seq from which we can calculate updates. Periodically we shorten the *EmailChangeLog* by removing entries from the beginning. At this point, the highest modseq value removed is set as the `lowModSeqEmail`.
- **lowModSeqThread**: `Number`
  The lowest mod seq from which we can calculate updates. Periodically we shorten the *ThreadChangeLog* by removing entries from the beginning. At this point, the highest modseq value removed is set as the `lowModSeqThread`.
- **lowModSeqMailbox**: `Number`
  The lowest mod seq from which we can calculate updates. Periodically we completely delete mailboxes that were marked deleted. At this point, if higher than the current value, the `updatedModSeq` of the mailbox is set as the new `lowModSeqMailbox`.

### Other data

There are two bits of data not included in the main database.

### A. Raw messages

The set of full raw messages, possibly in a blob store.

### B. Email index

For searching messages at any reasonable speed, an index is required from textual content within the message to the Email id. Describing how this should work is beyond the scope of this guide.

## Algorithms

The `state` property to return with getter calls to each type is:

- **Email**: The `highModSeqEmail` value.
- **Thread**: The `highModSeqThread` value.
- **Mailbox**: The `highModSeqMailbox` value.
- **Email/query**: The state property to use depends on the sort/filter of the
  message list, as some optimisations can be made for common cases. The state string should encode one or two values. In all cases, you need to include a modseq value, which should be on of the following:

  * If the sort or filter includes a mutable thread property
  (i.e threadUnread or threadFlagged), use `max(highModSeqEmail, highModSeqThread)`.
  * Otherwise, if the filter is or can be transformed to:
  `AND( inMailbox: mailboxId, <other conditions>)`, use
  `Mailbox.messagesHighestModSeq`
  * Otherwise, use `highModSeqEmail`

  If the filter is, or can be transformed to:
  `AND( inMailbox: mailboxId, <other conditions>)`, also encode
  `Mailbox.highestUID` into the state string; see *Email/queryChanges*
  algorithm below for how these values will be used.

### Email/changes

If the modseq given == the current `highModSeqEmail` value, there are no changes. If it is lower than `lowModSeqEmail` we cannot calculate changes.

If there are changes, find the first entry in the *EmailChangeLog* with an id >= the given modseq, and read forward from there.

### Thread/changes

If the modseq given == the current `highModSeqThread` value, there are no changes. If it is lower than `lowModSeqThread` we cannot calculate changes.

If there are changes, find the first entry in the *ThreadChangeLog* with an id >= the given modseq, and read forward from there.

### Mailbox/changes

If the modseq given == the current `highModSeqMailbox` value, there are no changes. If it is lower than `lowModSeqMailbox` we cannot calculate changes.

If there are changes, iterate through the set of Mailboxes comparing their `updatedModSeq` to the client mod seq. If higher, the mailbox has changed (if `deleted` is not `null` it has been deleted, otherwise it was created or updated). If the `updatedNotCountsModSeq` is *not* higher, only counts have changed.

### Email/query

Check the current state string as would be returned for *Email/query* with the same arguments. If it is the same as the state given, nothing has changed so you can return a response immediately. Otherwise…

First you need to get the complete list of messages that match the given filter. In the common case of…

    filter == { inMailbox: <mailboxId> }

…you are simply fetching the list of messages in a mailbox. This list is already pre-calculated for each mailbox and kept on disk (data structure 4). You can simply slurp this into memory and sort if needed (again, in the common case of sorting date-descending, it will be pre-sorted). Skip any messages marked `deleted`.

If the filter is more complex, you will need to do more work to get the set of matching messages and sort it. If there is a `String` component to the filter, first use the message index to get a set of matches. If there is a single *inMailbox* component, use the *MailboxEmailList* structure to get the list of messages in that mailbox. Finally iterate through and lookup each potential match in the messages table (data structure 1) to apply any other components of the filter. Finally sort as specified.

Once you have the complete message list, you can find the requested section to return to the client. Since a client is likely to fetch a different portion of the same message list soon after, it is beneficial if the server can keep the last list requested by the user in a cache for a short time.

    let collapseThreads = args.collapseThreads
    let position = args.position
    let anchor = args.anchor
    let anchorOffset = args.anchorOffset
    let limit = args.limit
    let total = 0
    let emailIds = [] # NB Max size of array is limit

    # If not collapsing threads, we can just jump to the required section
    if !collapseThreads {
      total = messageList.length
      for i = position; i < total; i = i + 1 {
        emailIds.push( msg.id )
      }
    } else {
      # Optimisation for the common case
      let totalIsKnown = filter is just mailbox
      let SeenThread = new Set()
      let numFound = 0
      foreach msg in sortedFilteredList {
        if !SeenThread{ msg.threadId } {
          SeenThread.add( msg.threadId )
          total += 1
          if position >= total && numFound < limit {
            emailIds.push( msg.id )
            numFound += 1
            if numFound == limit && totalIsKnown {
              break;
            }
          }
        }
      }
      if totalIsKnown {
        total = mailbox.totalThreads
      }
    }

### Email/queryChanges

For the common case of…

    filter == { inMailbox: <messageId> }

… take the complete message list for the mailbox (data structure 4), including those marked deleted. Sort if necessary. The state given by the user (as returned from *Email/query*) contains the previous `highestUID` and a `highestModSeq`. Then:

    let index = -1
    let total = 0
    let added = []
    let removed = []
    let collapseThreads = args.collapseThreads
    let uptoHasBeenFound = false

    # A mutable sort is one which sorts by a mutable property, e.g.
    # sort flagged messages/threads first.
    let isMutable = sort.isMutable()

    # Does the sort include a thread property (thread unread/thread flagged)
    # or just message properties?
    let isOnThreadUnreadOrFlagged = sort.isOnThreadUnreadOrFlagged()

    # An exemplar is the first message in each thread in the list, given the
    # sort order that
    # The old exemplar is the exemplar in the client's old state.
    let SeenExemplar = collapseThreads ? new Set() : null
    let SeenOldExemplar = collapseThreads ? new Set() : null

    foreach listMsg in messageList {

      let isNewExemplar = false
      let isOldExemplar = false

      let isNew = ( listMsg.uid > args.highestUID )
      let isChanged = ( listMsg.updatedModSeq > args.highestModSeq )
      let isDeleted = ( listMsg.deleted != null )
      let wasDeleted = ( isDeleted && !isChanged )

      # Is this message the current exemplar?
      if !isDeleted &&
          ( !collapseThreads || !SeenExemplar{ listMsg.threadId } ) {
        isNewExemplar = true
        index += 1
        total += 1
        if collapseThreads {
          SeenExemplar.set( listMsg.threadId )
        }
      }

      # Was this message an old exemplar?
      # 1. Must not have been added to mailbox after the client's state
      # 2. Must have been removed from mailbox before the client's state
      # 3. Must not have already found the old exemplar
      if !isNew && !wasDeleted &&
          ( !collapseThreads || !SeenOldExemplar{ listMsg.threadId } ) {
        isOldExemplar = true
        if collapseThreads {
          SeenOldExemplar.set( listMsg.threadId )
        }
      }

      if isOldExemplar && !isNewExemplar {
        removed.push( listMsg.emailId )
      }
      else if !isOldExemplar && isNewExemplar {
        added.push({
          index: index,
          id: listMsg.emailId
        })
      }
      # Special case for mutable sorts (based on isFlagged/isUnread)
      if isMutable && isOldExemplar && isNewExemplar {
        # Has the isUnread/isFlagged status of the message/thread
        # (as appropriate) possibly changed since the client's state?
        let modSeq = isOnThreadUnreadOrFlagged ?
          getThread( listMsg.threadId ).updatedModSeq :
          listMsg.updatedModSeq
        # If so, we need to remove the exemplar from the client view and add
        # it back in at the correct position.
        if modSeq > args.modSeq {
          removed.push( listMsg.emailId )
          added.push({
            index: index,
            id: listMsg.emailId,
          })
        }
      }
      # If this is the last message the client cares about, we can stop here
      # and just return what we've calculated so far. We already know the total
      # count for this message list as we keep it pre calculated and cached in
      # the Mailbox object.
      #
      # However, if the sort is mutable we can't break early, as messages may
      # have moved from the region we care about to lower down the list.
      if !isMutable && !isNew && listMsg.emailId == args.upto {
        break
      }
    } # End loop

    total = getTotal( mailbox, collapseThreads )

For other filters, you can use the following algorithm instead, but it does require a complete scan of all messages:

    let index = -1
    let total = 0
    let added = []
    let removed = []
    let collapseThreads = args.collapseThreads
    let uptoHasBeenFound = false

    # A mutable filter/sort is one which uses a mutable property, e.g.
    # flagged/unread state
    let isMutable = sort.isMutable() || filter.isMutable()

    # Does the sort or filter include a thread property (thread unread/thread
    # flagged) or just message properties?
    let isOnThreadUnreadOrFlagged =
      sort.isOnThreadUnreadOrFlagged() || filter.isOnThreadUnreadOrFlagged()

    # An exemplar is the first message in each thread in the list, given the
    # sort order that
    # The old exemplar is the exemplar in the client's old state.
    let SeenExemplar = collapseThreads ? new Set() : null
    let SeenOldExemplar = collapseThreads ? new Set() : null

    # Get the full list of messages. Any non-mutable filter components
    # may be applied at this stage, if possible.
    let messages = allMessages().sortBy( args.sort )

    foreach message in messages {

      let isNewExemplar = false
      let isOldExemplar = false

      let isMatch = filter.matches( message )
      let isNew = ( message.createdModSeq > args.highestModSeq )
      let isChanged = ( message.updatedModSeq > args.highestModSeq )
      let isDeleted = ( message.deleted != null )
      let wasDeleted = ( isDeleted && !isChanged )

      # Check for thread changed if necessary
      if isOnThreadUnreadOrFlagged && !isChanged &&
          getThread( listMsg.threadId ).updatedModSeq > args.highestModSeq {
        isChanged = true
      }

      # Is this message the current exemplar?
      if isMatch && !isDeleted &&
          ( !collapseThreads || !SeenExemplar{ message.threadId } ) {
        isNewExemplar = true
        index += 1
        total += 1
        if collapseThreads {
          SeenExemplar.set( listMsg.threadId )
        }
      }

      # Was this message an old exemplar?
      # 1. Must not have been created after the client's state
      # 2. Must have been deleted before the client's state
      # 3. Must match the filter, or have changed and the sort/filter is on a
           mutable property so it may have matched before.
      # 4. Must not have already found the old exemplar, or filter/sort is on a
           mutable property.
      if !isNew && !wasDeleted &&
          ( isMatch || ( isMutable && isChanged ) ) &&
          ( !collapseThreads || isMutable ||
            !SeenOldExemplar{ listMsg.threadId } ) {
        isOldExemplar = true
        if collapseThreads && !isMutable {
          SeenOldExemplar.set( listMsg.threadId )
        }
      }

      if isOldExemplar && ( !isNewExemplar || isMutable ) {
        removed.push( listMsg.emailId )
      }
      if isNewExemplar && ( !isOldExemplar || isMutable ) {
        added.push({
          index: index,
          id: listMsg.emailId,
        })
      }
    } # End loop

## Conversion between RFC5322 messages and JMAP Email objects

Extra advice on conversion:

* When encoding the *name* property for an EmailBodyPart (i.e. an attachment's
  file name), for the most compatibility with existing clients you should RFC2231 encode the name as the *filename* parameter of the *Content-Disposition* MIME header, and also RFC2047 encode it as the *name* parameter of the *Content-Type* header (despite the latter being technically invalid).

## Vacation

As mentioned in [RFC-5230 Sieve Vacation extension](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5230), implementations should avoid sending vacation responses to mailing lists. Implementations should also avoid sending responses to well-known addresses like "MAILER-DAEMON", "LISTSERV", "majordomo", and other addresses typically used only by automated systems.  Additionally, addresses ending in "-request" or beginning in "owner-", i.e., reserved for mailing list software, should also not receive vacation responses. Implementations should not respond to any message that contains a "List-Id" [RFC-2919](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2919.txt), "List-Help", "List-Subscribe", "List-Unsubscribe", "List-Post", "List-Owner", or "List-Archive" [RFC-2369](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2369.txt) header field.

Also, be careful about infinite loops. Vacation responses should not be sent in response to another vacation response. To avoid doing so, as specified in [RFC-5230](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5230), an Auto-Submitted header with a value of "auto-replied" should be included in any vacation message sent. Implementations should not send responses to email with an Auto-Submitted header with a value of "auto-replied".

The server must keep track of sent notifications, in order to avoid sending notifications twice to the same recipient during the duration of a given vacation. Implementers must take care that if the vacation is modified, previous tracking information should be discarded.

Finaly, implementations are encouraged to comply with [RFC-3824](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3834), which defines a personal responder. To do so:

 - The Date field should be set to the date and time when the vacation response was generated. Note that this may not be the same as the time the message was delivered to the user.
 - The From field should be set to the address of the given account.
 - The To field should be set to the address of the recipient of the response.
 - An Auto-Submitted field with a value of "auto-replied" should be included in the message header of any vacation message sent.
 - Replies must have the In-Reply-To field set to the Message-ID of the original message, and the References field should be updated with the Message-ID of the original message.

If the original message lacks a Message-ID, an In-Reply-To need not be generated, and References need not be changed. [RFC-2822 section 3.6.4](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2822#section-3.6.4) provides a complete description of how References fields should be generated.

## Binary upload error response codes

The upload handler is a standard HTTP resource, so must conform with the HTTP standard. For reference, here are some of the appropriate HTTP responses to return for client errors:

### 400: Bad request

The request was malformed (this includes the case where an `X-JMAP-AccountId` header is sent with a value that does not exist).

### 401: Unauthorized

The `Authorization` header was missing or did not contain a valid token. Reauthenticate and then retry the request. As per the HTTP spec, the response MUST have a `WWW-Authenticate` header listing the available authentication schemes.

### 413: Request Entity Too Large

The file is larger than the maximum size the server is willing to accept for a single file.

### 415: Unsupported Media Type

An unacceptable type is uploaded. The server MAY choose to not allow certain content types to be uploaded, such as executable files.

### 429: Rate limited

The client has made too many upload requests recently, or has too many concurrent uploads currently in progress. The response MAY include a `Retry-After` header indicating how long to wait before making a new request.
